We are now in a new era of wars. And
unless you reestablish order fast, then
we are doomed.
You've all Noah Harrari,
one of the brightest minds on planet
earth, historian, a bestselling author
of some of the most influential
non-fiction books in the world today.
I think we are very near the end of our
species because people often spend so
much effort trying to gain something
without understanding the consequences.
For example, we will get to a life where
you can live indefinitely. But realizing
that you have a chance to live forever,
but if there is an accident, you die.
The people who will be in that situation
will be at a level of anxiety and terror
unlike anything that we know. Then you
have artificial intelligence and the
world is is not ready for it. It's the
first technology in history that can
make decisions by itself and take power
away from us to hack human beings,
manipulate our behavior and making all
these decisions for us or about us.
Whether to give you a loan, whether to
give you a mortgage, dating us, shaping
your romantic life. But the real problem
is that increasingly the humans at the
top could be puppets. When the most
consequential decisions are made by
algorithms, global financial decisions,
wars. This is extremely dangerous, but
it's not inevitable. Humans can change
it.
But with what's to come, are you
optimistic about the future?
I'm very worried about two things. First
of all,
quick one. This is really, really
fascinating to me. On the back end of
our YouTube channel, it says that 69.9%
of you that watch this channel
frequently over the lifetime of this
channel haven't yet hit the subscribe
button. I just wanted to ask you a
favor. It helps this channel so much if
you choose to subscribe. Helps us scale
the guests, helps us scale the
production, and it makes this show
bigger. So, if I could ask you for one
favor, if you've watched the show before
and you've enjoyed it and you like this
episode that you're currently watching,
could you please hit the subscribe
button? Thank you so much. and I will
repay that gesture by making sure that
everything we do here gets better and
better and better and better. That is a
promise I'm willing to make you. Do we
have a deal?
[Music]
I have three of your books here and
these are three books that sent a huge
tidal wave, a ripple through society.
with these books and with all of the
work that you're doing now, with the
lectures you give, the the interviews
you give, what is your mission? What
what is the sort of if I was to be able
to summarize what your collective
mission is with your work? What is that?
It's to clarify and to focus the public
conversation, the global conversation,
uh to help people focus on the most
important challenges that are facing
humankind and also to bring at least a
little bit of clarity to the collective
and and to the individual mind. I mean,
one of my main messages in all the books
is that our minds are like factories
that constantly produce
stories and fictions that then come
between us and the world. And we often
spend our lives interacting with
fictions that we or that other people
created uh with and completely losing
touch w with with reality. And my job
and I think the job of historians more
generally is to show us a way out.
Inherent in much of your work is what
feels like a warning.
And I've I've watched hundreds of videos
that you've produced or interviews
you've done um all around the world and
it feels like you're trying to warn us
about something, multiple things.
Mhm. If my estimation there is correct,
what is the warning?
Much of what we take to be real is is is
fictions. And and the reason that
fictions are so central in in human
history is because we control the planet
and rather than the chimpanzees or the
elephants or any of the other animals
because not because of some kind of in
individual genius that each of us has
but because we can cooperate much better
than any other animal. We can cooperate
in much larger numbers and also much
more flexibly.
And the reason we can do that is because
we can create and believe in fictional
stories because every largecale human
cooperation whether uh religion or
nations or corporations
are based on mythologies on on fictions.
Again I'm not just talking about gods.
This is the easy example. Money is also
a fiction that we created. Corporations
are a fiction. they exist only in our
minds. Uh even lawyers would tell you
that corporations are legal fictions.
And this is on on the one hand such a
source of of immense power.
But on the other hand, again the danger
is that we completely lose touch with
reality and we are manipulated by all
these fictions, by all these stories.
Again, stories are not not bad. They are
tools. As long as we use them to
cooperate and to help each other, that's
wonderful. Um, money is not bad. If we
didn't have money, we would not have a
trade network. We everybody would have
maybe with their friends and family to
to produce everything by themselves like
the chimpanzees do. uh the fact that we
can enjoy uh food and clothing and
medicines and enter entertainment
created by people on the other side of
the world is largely because of money.
But if we forget that this is a tool
that we created in order to help
ourselves and instead uh this tool kind
of enslaves us and runs our life and um
you know I'm now just back home in
Israel there is a terrible war being
waged and most wars in history and also
now they are about stories they're about
fictions. People think that humans fight
over the same things that wolves or
chimpanzees fight about, that we fight
about territory, that we fight about
food. It sometimes happens, but most
wars in history were not really about
territory or food. There is enough land,
for instance, between the Jordan River
and the Mediterranean to build houses
and schools and hospitals for everybody.
And there is certainly enough food.
There's no shortage of food. But people
have different mythologies, different
stories in their minds and they can't
find a common story they can they can
agree about. And this is at the root of
most UN conflicts. And being able to
tell the difference between what is a
fiction in our own mind and what is the
reality. This is a a crucial skill and
we are not getting better at finding
this difference as time go time time
goes on
and also with new technologies which I
write about a lot like artificial
intelligence. The fantasy that AI will
answer our questions, will find the
truth for us, will tell us the
difference between fiction and reality.
This is this is just another fiction. I
mean AI can do many things better than
humans but for reasons that we can
discuss I don't think that it will
necessarily be better than humans at
finding the truth or uh um uncovering
reality. It it strikes me that the the
thing that made us successful,
you know, this ability to believe in
fictions and I use the word successful,
you know, powerful powerful. Yes.
Took over the world.
The thing that made us powerful could
well be the thing that makes us
powerless
in the sense that our ability to believe
in fictions and stories create a society
that would potentially lead to our
powerlessness.
That's kind of one of the the the
messages that when I connect the dots
throughout your work and you look off
into the future, um I'm left feeling.
And even you think about the modern
problems we have, those are typically
consequences of our ability to believe
in stories
and to believe in fictions.
And if you play that forward 100 years,
maybe 200 years,
you don't believe that um you believe
we'll be the last of our species, right?
I think we are very near the kind of end
of our species. It doesn't necessarily
mean that we'll be destroyed in some
huge nuclear war or something like that.
Uh it could very well mean that we'll
just change ourselves using
uh bioengineering and using AI and brain
computer interfaces. We will change
ourselves to such an extent that we'll
become something completely different,
something far more different from
present day homo sapiens than we today
are different from chimpanzees or from
Neanderthalss. I mean basically you know
um
you have a very deep connection still
with all the other animals because we
are completely organic.
We are organic entities. our psychology,
our social habits, they are the product
of organic evolution and male and more
specifically mamalian evolution over
tens of millions of years. So we share
so much of our psychology and of our
kind of social habits with chimpanzees
and with with other other mammals.
Looking a 100 years or 200 years to the
future, maybe we are no longer organic
or not fully organic. Um you could uh
have a world dominated by cyborgs which
are entities combining organic with
inorganic parts for instance with brain
computer interfaces. Um you could have
completely nonorganic entities.
So all the legacy and also all the
limitations of 4 billion years of
organic evolution might be irrelevant or
inapplicable
do you think
to the beings of the future?
What bet would you make?
Because you're saying maybe here
I don't know. I mean we could destroy
ourselves. I think there is a greater I
mean to completely destroy every last
single human in the world. it is
possible given the technology that we
now command but it's it's very
difficult.
Um I think it's there is a greater
chance and again this is just
speculation nobody really knows but I
think I mean lots of people could suffer
terribly
but I think it's more likely that uh uh
some people will survive and then will
undergo radical changes.
So it's not that humanity is completely
destroyed. It's just transformed
into into something else. And just to
give an example of what we are talking
about, organic beings like us need to be
in one place at any one time. We are now
here in this room. That's it. Um, if you
kind of disconnect our hands or our feet
from our body, we die or at least we
lose control of of these. I mean, and
this is true of all organic entities, of
plants, of of animals. Now, with cyborgs
or with inorganic entities, this is no
longer true. They could be spread over
time, time, and space. I mean if you
find a way and people are working on
finding ways to directly connect brains
with computers or brains with bionic
parts there is there there is no
essential reason that all the parts of
the be of of the entity need to be in
the same room at the same time. As you
said that, you know, I started thinking
a little bit about Neuralink and what
Elon Musk is doing interfacing us with
computers. But then I had a secondary
thought which is if there could be two
Stevens, one here and then one in the
United States right now because we're
connected to the same computer
interface. Theoretically, I could hack
Jack over there.
I could hack his interface. So there
could be three Stevens because I hack
Jack. And then I hack you and then
there's four. And then I could
eventually try and hack the entirety of
the world or a country.
Yeah.
And there could basically be one
one
once you can connect directly brains to
computers. First of all, I'm not sure if
it's possible.
I mean, people like Elon Musk in
Norolink, they tell us it's possible.
I'm I'm I'm I'm still waiting for the
evidence. I don't think it's impossible,
but I think it's much more difficult
than than than people assume. partly
because we are very far from
understanding the brain and we are even
further away from understanding the
mind. We assume that the brain somehow
produces the mind but this is just an
assumption. We still don't have a
working model a working theory for how
it happens. Uh but if it happens, if it
is possible to directly connect brains
and computers and integrate them into
these kinds of cyborgs, nobody has any
idea what happens next, how the world
would look like. And it is certainly
makes it a plausible if again if this is
this if you reach that point that you
could have an interbrain net
the same way that lots of computers are
connected together to form the internet.
If you can connect also brains and
computers directly why can't we then
connect an interbrain net which connects
lots of brains as as you as you as you
uh uh uh described. Again, I I have no
idea what it means. I think this is the
point when the way that our
organic brains understand reality
u
even our imagination in the end is the
product as far as we can tell of organic
biochemistry. Do you think
wait so so we we are not equipped I
think to have a kind of serious
discussion of what a nonorganic
brain or a non-organic mind might be
capable of of doing how it would how it
would look like and all the basic
assumptions that we have about brains
and minds they are limited to the
organic types. How do you feel about
artificial intelligence and what's
happening? This year has been a real
sort of landmark year in the
a big leap forward for artificial
intelligence, the conversation, public
awareness,
um the technology itself, the investment
in the technology, which is always, you
know, a a very important indicator of
what's to come.
Yeah.
How do you how do you as someone that
spent a lot of time thinking about this
emotionally, how do you feel about it?
uh very concerned. I mean it's moving
even faster than I expected. Uh when I
wrote say Homodos in 2016, I didn't
think we would reach this this point so
quickly where we are at 2023. And the
world is is not ready for it.
And again, it's not AI has enormous
positive potential.
We and and this this should be clear.
And there is no chance of just banning
AI or stopping all development in AI. I
tend to speak a lot about the dangers
simply because you have enough people
out there, all the entrepreneurs and uh
uh all the investors talking about the
positive potential. So it's kind of my
job to talk about the negative
potential, the dangers. But it there is
a lot of positive potential and uh
humans are incredibly capable in terms
of adapting to new situations. I don't
think it's impossible for human society
to adapt to the new AI reality. The only
thing is it takes time and apparently we
don't have that time and people compare
it to previous big historical
revolutions like the invention of print
or the invention of or or the the
industrial revolution. And you hear
people say yes when the industrial
revolution happened in the 19th century.
So you had all these pro prophecies of
doom about how industry and the new
factories and the steam engines and
electricity how how they will destroy
humanity or destroy our psychology or
whatever. And in the end it was okay.
And when I hear these kinds of
comparisons as as a historian I'm very
worried about two things. First of all,
they underestimate the magnitude of the
AI revolution. AI is nothing like print.
It's nothing like uh the industrial
revolution of the 19th century. It's far
far bigger. There is a fundamental
difference between AI and the printing
press of the steam engine or the radio
or any previous technology we invented.
The difference is it's the first
technology in history that can make
decisions by itself and that can create
new ideas by itself. A printing press or
a radio set could not write new music or
uh new speeches and could not decide
what to print and what to broadcast.
This was always the job of humans. This
is why the printing press and the radio
set in the end empowered humanity.
that you now have more power to
disseminate your ideas. AI is different.
It can potentially take power away from
us. It can decide, it's already deciding
by itself what to broadcast on social
media. Its algorithms deciding what to
promote.
And increasingly, it also creates much
of the content by itself. It can compose
entirely new music. it can compose
entirely new political manifestos, holy
books, whatever. Um, so it's a much
bigger challenge to handle that kind.
It's it's an independent agent in a way
that radio and the printing press were
not. The other thing I find worrying
about the comparison with say the
industrial revolution is that yes in the
end in a way it was okay but to get
there we had to pass through some
terrible experiments.
When the industrial revolution came
along nobody knew how to build a a
benign industrial society. So people
experimented.
One big experiment was European
imperialism. Many people thought that to
build an industrial society means
building an empire. Unless you have an
empire that controls the sources of the
raw materials you need, iron, coal,
rubber, cotton, whatever. And unless you
control the markets, you will not be
able to survive as an industrial
society. And there was a very close link
also conceptually
between building an industrial society
and building an empire. And all the
leaders the the the initial leaders of
the industrial revolution built empires.
Not just Britain and and France also
small countries like Belgium also Japan
when it joined the industrial revolution
it immediately set about conquering an
empire. Another tribal experiment was
Soviet communism. They also thought how
do you build an industrial society? You
build a communist dictatorship. And it
was the same with Nazism. You cannot
separate communism and Nazism from the
industrial revolution. You could not
have created a communist or a Nazi
totalitarian regime in the 18th century.
If you don't have trains, if you don't
have electricity, if you don't have
radio, you cannot create a totalitarian
regime. So these are just a few examples
of the failed experiments. You know, you
try to adapt to something completely
new, you very often uh um experiment and
some of your experiments fail. And if we
now have to go in the 21st century
through the same process, okay, we now
have not radio and and trains, we now
have AI and bioengineering. And we again
need to experiment perhaps with new
empires, perhaps with new totalitarian
regimes in order to discover how to
build a benign AI society, then we are
doomed as a specy. we will not be able
to survive another round of imperialist
wars and totalitarian regimes. So
anybody who thinks hey we've passed
through the industrial revolution with
all the prophecies of doom in the end we
got it right. No if as a historian I I
would say that I would give humanity a C
minus on how we adapted to the
industrial revolution. If we get a C
minus again in the 21st century that's
the end of us. It seems quite trivial to
many that
the AI revolution has seemed to begun
with large language models. And when I
read sapiens, this book I have here,
language was so central to what made us
powerful as homo sapiens.
In the beginning was the word. I didn't
say it. You know, it's a it's a very
very widespread idea
that um ultimately our power is based on
words. Uh the reason that we controlled
the world and not the chimpanzeee or the
elephants is because we had a much more
sophisticated language
which enabled us again to tell these
stories.
stories about ancestral spirits and
about guardian gods and about our tribe,
our nation, which formed the basis for
cooperation. And because we could
cooperate, you could have a thousand
people, a thousand humans cooperating in
a tribe, whereas the Neandertos could
cooperate only on the level of say 50 or
100 individuals. This is why we rule the
world and not the Neandertos. And you
look at every subsequent
kind of growth in human power and uh you
see the same thing that uh ultimately
you tell a story with words and language
is like the master key that unlocks all
the doors of our civilization.
Whether it's cathedrals or whether it's
banks, they're based on language, on
stories we tell.
that again it's very obvious in the case
of religion
but also if you think about the world's
financial system so money has no value
except in the stories that we tell and
believe each other if you think about
gold coins or paper bank notes or
cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin um they
have no value in themselves you cannot
eat them or drink them or do anything
useful with them but you have people
telling you very compelling stories
about the value of these things and if
enough people believe the story then it
works.
They're also protected by language like
my cryptocurrency is protected by a
bunch of words.
Yeah. Uh they're created by words
and they they function with with words
and and and and symbols.
Uh when you communicate with your banker
it's it's with words. I mean what
happens when AI can uh uh create deep
fakes of your everything, your voice,
your image, uh the the way you talk, the
type of words you use. So there is
already an arms race between banks and
fraudsters. I mean we want the easiest
communication with our banker. I just
pick up the phone, I tell a few words,
and they transfer a million dollars. But
at the same time, I also want want to be
protected from an AI that impersonates
my my voice and tone of tone of voice
and and whatever. And this is becoming
difficult. But on a deeper level, again,
AI could create because money is
ultimately made of words, of stories.
AI could create new kinds of money.
uh the same way that you know
cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin have been
created simply by somebody telling
people a story and enough people finding
this story convincing. And I I guess as
a CEO and as an as an entrepreneur, you
know that if you want to get
investments,
what really gets investments is a good
story.
And what happens to the financial system
if increasingly our financial stories
are told by AI?
And what happens to the financial system
and even to the political system
if AI eventually creates new financial
devices that humans cannot understand?
Already today much of the activity
on the world markets is being done by
algorithms
at such a speed and with such complexity
that most people don't understand what's
happening there.
I I if you had to guess what is the
percentage of people in the world today
that really understand the financial
system
what would be your kind of
less than 1%.
Less than 1%. Okay. Let's be kind of
conservative about it. 1% let's say.
Okay.
Fast forward 10 or 20 years. AI creates
such complicated financial devices that
there is not a single human being on
earth that understand finance anymore.
What are the implications for politics?
Like you vote for a government but none
of the humans in the government, not the
prime minister, not the finance
minister, nobody understand the
financial system. They just rely on AI
to tell them what is happening.
Is this still a democracy? Is this still
a a human form of government in any way?
What do you say to someone that hears
that and goes, "Ah, that's just that's
nonsense. That's never going to happen."
Why not? I mean, let's look back 15
years to the last big financial crisis
in 2007208.
This financial crisis to a large extent
began with these extremely complicated
financial devices CDOS's
what's the acronym collateral depth
something I don't even know what the
word letter stands for you had these
kind of whiz kids in Wall Street
inventing a new financial device that
nobody except them really understood
which is why also it wasn't regulated
effectively by the banks and the
governments and it worked well for a
couple of years and then it brought down
the world's financial system
and um what happens if now AI's comes
with even more sophisticated financial
devices
and for a couple of years everything
works well they make trillions of
dollars for us and then one day it
doesn't one day the system collapses and
nobody understands what is happening and
uh again it's not that you didn't go to
college or whatever. No, it's just
objectively the complexity of the system
has reached a point when only an AI
is able to crunch the numbers, is able
to process enough data to really get to
really grasp the shape the dynamics of
of the financial system.
We're already there though. You know, I
think if anyone does understand how the
financial system works and the markets
work, it is a bunch of
homo sapiens relying on a computer to
tell it something and it it trusting
that computer's calculations.
Yeah. And and this will get more and
more complicated and and and
sophisticated. And for people who say
no, it's not going to happen, the
question is what is stopping it? I mean,
you know, in all the discussions about
AI,
the kind of dangers that draw people's
attention, like the poster child of AI
dangers is things like AI creating a new
virus that kills billions of people, a
new pandemic. So you a lot of people
concerned about how do we prevent an AI
by itself or maybe some small terrorist
organization or even a 16-year-old
teenager giving an AI a task to create a
dangerous virus and release it to the
world. How do we prevent this? And this
is a serious concern and we should be
concerned about it. But this gets a lot
more attention than the question, how do
we prevent the financial system from
becoming so complicated that humans can
no longer understand it?
And I see a lot of regulations
being uh at least considered how to
prevent AI from creating dangerous new
viruses. Um I don't see any kind of
effort to keep the financial system at a
level that humans understand it.
Why do you think that is?
U
I mean I had a guess. My guess was why
would the UK
Mhm.
cut off then, you know, why would they
give themselves a disadvantage?
Exactly.
When you know there it just means that
the UK will suffer and if America is
using a really advanced AI algorithm to
get ahead, we have to keep up.
Yeah. It's it's the logic of of the arms
race. And again, it's not all bad. I
mean, you have a better financial
system. Uh you have a more prosperous
economy. I mean, money isn't bad. I
mean, it's the basis for almost all
human cooperation.
And a lot of financial devices in the
end, if you think what are they, they
are devices to establish trust between
people, especially trust between
strangers. And money in essence is a
device for establishing trust. I don't
know you, you don't know me, but we both
trust this gold coin or piece of paper
so we can cooperate on uh uh uh sharing
food or creating a a medicine.
And the most sophisticated financial
devices, they basically do the same
thing. Stocks and bonds and these
CDOS's, they are a method to establish
trust. And when you open a new bank
account, the most important thing is how
do I trust the bank to really uh h take
care of my money and to follow my
instructions but not to be open to fraud
and things like that. And again, you as
as as an investor
um when you try to get money from from
from or you as an entrepreneur when when
you try to get money from investors, the
biggest issue is always trust.
And if somebody can comes up can can
come up with a new uh uh way to
establish trust between people, that's a
good thing. But if this new way
increasingly depends on non-human
intelligence on again on systems that
humans cannot understand. That's the big
question. What happens to human society
when the trust that is at the basis of
all social interactions
is actually no longer trust in humans.
It's trust in a non-human intelligence
that we don't fully understand and that
we cannot anticipate. And part of the
problem with regulating AI or AI safety,
it goes back to what we discussed
earlier that AI is different from
printing presses or radio sets or even
atom bonds.
If you want to make nuclear energy safe,
then you need to think about all the
different ways that uh I don't know a
nuclear power station can uh uh uh can
have an accident.
And I guess there is a limited number of
things that can go wrong. And ideally if
if you think hard, if you have if you
have enough people thinking hard enough,
you can make safe nuclear reactors, safe
nuclear power stations.
Now, but AI is fundamentally different
because AI keeps changing. It keeps
reacting to the world. It keeps reacting
to you coming up with new inventions,
new ideas, new decisions. So making AI
safe is a bit like making a nuclear
reactor safe taking into account the
fact that the nuclear reactor can decide
to change
in ways that you can't anticipate and
even worse it can react to you. So if
you build a particular safety mechanism
for the nuclear reactor, what happens if
the nuclear reactor say oh they build
this mechanism let's do that to h
somehow get around the safety mechanism.
We don't have this problem with nuclear
reactors. But this is the problem with
AI. We are trying to contain something
which is an independent agent and which
might actually come to understand us
better than we understand it. I'm really
curious about how this will impact you
know you talked about elected officials
there and how their systems will be sort
of um dri their financial decision-m
might be driven by algorithms
but government's an authority itself
I've pondered recently whether there'll
come a day in the notsodistant future
where we might vote for an algorithm
where we might vote for an AI to be our
government. Is that crazy thinking?
I think we we we're quite a long way off
from there. We would still want humans
at least in the symbolic role of being
the prime minister, the the member of
parliament, whatever, the president.
The real problem is that increasingly
these humans could be kind of
figureheads or or puppets when the real
decisions, the most consequential
decisions are uh are made by algorithms.
be partly because the the the um it will
just be too complicated for the humans
at the top to understand the situation
or to understand the different options.
So going back to the financial example.
So imagine that you know it's it's 4:00
in the morning. There is a phone call uh
to the prime minister from the finance
algorithm
telling the P the prime minister that we
are facing a financial meltdown
uh and that we have to do something
within the next I don't know 30 minutes
to prevent a national or global
financial meltdown. And there are like
three options and the algorithm
recommends option A and there is just
not enough time to explain to the prime
minister how did the algorithm reach the
conclusion and even what is the meaning
of these different options
and again people think about this
scenario mostly in relation to war.
Mhm. that what happens if you have an
algorithm in charge of the your security
system and it it alerts you to a massive
incoming cyber attack and you have to
react immediately and this could if you
react in in a specific way this could
mean war with another nation but you
just don't have enough time to
understand how the algorithm reached the
decision and how the algorithm was also
able to determine that of the all the
different options, this is the best
option.
Do you think that humans believe we're
more complicated and special than we
actually are?
Because I think part of much many many
of the rebuttals when we talk about
artificial intelligence stem back to
this idea that we're in, you know, we're
like innately genius, creative,
spiritual, special,
you know, um artificial intelligence
like our our intelligence is somewhat
divine or
we've got free will and you know we
Yeah. Yeah, I mean it's
if the argument is we have free will, we
have a divine soul and therefore no
algorithm will will ever be able to
understand us and to predict our
decisions or to manipulate us then this
is a very common argument but it's
obviously nonsensical. I mean even
before AI uh it was uh even with
previous technology it was possible to a
large extent to predict people's
behavior and to manipulate them and AI
just takes it to the next level. Now
with regard to the discussion of of free
will
my my position is you cannot start with
the assumption that humans have free
will. If you start with this assumption
then it's uh actually is very
it it makes you very incurious lacking
curiosity
about about yourself about human beings.
It kind of closes off the investigation
before it began.
Um you assume that any decision you make
is just a result of my free will. Why
did I choose this politician, this
product, uh uh this spouse? Because it's
my free will. And if this is your
position, there is nothing to
investigate. You just assume you have
this kind of divine spark within you
that makes all the decisions and there
is nothing to investigate there.
Um I would say no start investigating
and you'll probably discover that there
are a lot of factors whether it's
external factors like cultural
traditions and also internal factors
like biological mechanisms that shape
your decisions. you chose this
politician or this spouse because of
certain cultural traditions and because
of certain biological mechanisms, your
DNA, your uh uh brain structure,
whatever. And this actually makes it
possible for you to get to know yourself
better. Now if after a long
investigation
you've reached the conclusion that yes
there are cultural influences, there are
political influences, there are genetic
and neurological influences, but still
there is a certain percentage of my
decision that cannot be explained by any
of these things. Then okay, call it free
will and we can discuss it. But don't
start with this assumption because then
you lose the incentive to explore
yourself.
And anybody who embarks on such a
process of self exploration, whether
it's in therapy, whether it's in
meditation, whether it's in the
laboratory of a brain scientist or uh as
a historian in the archive, you will be
amazed to discover how much of your
decisions are not the result of some
mystical free will. They are the result
of cultural and biological factors. And
this also means that you are vulnerable
to being deciphered and manipulated
by political parties, by corporations,
by AI. People who have this kind of
mystical belief in free will are the
easiest people to manipulate
because they don't think they can be
manipulated.
Uh and obviously they can. We humans
should get used to the idea that we are
no longer mysterious souls. We are now
hackable animals. That's what we are.
You said that at the World Economic
Forum.
Yeah. Again, this is the same point
basically that it's now possible to hack
human beings. Not just to hack our
smartphones, our bank accounts, our
computers, but to really hack our
brains, our minds, and to uh uh predict
our behavior and manipulate our behavior
more than in any previous time in
history.
The other line that you said uh which
really made me think and ponder was
um
as previously human life was about the
drama of decision-m and without this we
won't have a meaning in life.
Yeah.
that if you look, you know, at politics,
at religion and at at culture,
people told the stories about their
lives or the lives of people in general
as a kind of of drama of decision
making.
Mhm.
That you reach a particular junction in
life and you need to choose you need to
choose between good and evil. You need
to choose between political parties. You
need to choose your what to study at
university or where to work, what kind
of job to to to apply to.
And our stories revolved around these
decisions.
And what happens to human life if
increasingly the power to make decisions
is taken from us?
And increasingly it's algorithms
making all these decisions for us or
about us.
Is that possible?
It's already happening. Increasingly,
you know, you apply to a bank to get a
loan. In many places, it's no longer a
human banker who is making this decision
about you whether to give you a loan,
whether to give you a mortgage. It's an
algorithm analyzing
billions of bits of data about you and
about of millions of other customers or
previous loans determining whether you
are creditw worthy or not. And if you
ask the bank if they refuse to give you
a loan and you ask the bank why didn't
you give me a loan and the bank says we
don't know. the the computer said no and
we just believe our our our computer our
algorithm and it's happening also in the
judicial system increasingly that uh um
various judicial decisions verdicts like
for how many like the judge decided that
you committed some crime the sentence
whether to send you to two months or
eight months or two years in prison is
increasingly determined by an algorithm
uh you apply to a place at university,
you apply to a job. This too is
increasingly decided by algorithms.
Dating
uh dating. Yes. I mean even um even un
unknown unbeknownst to you, the
algorithms of the dating apps that
you're using are shaping your romantic
life. But what in a world of you know
robotics and artificial intelligence why
do I need to find a person at all?
Why not just have a relationship with
with a robot or with an AI?
Yeah. Uh we do see the beginning of of
of this that people are building more
and more intimate relationships with
non-human intelligences with AIs and
bots and and so forth. And this raises a
lot of of difficult and and profound
questions. Now, part of the problem is
that the AIS are built to mimic intimacy
that the the ability intimacy is an
extremely powerful thing. Not just in
romance, also in the market, also in
politics. If you want to change
somebody's mind about anything,
political issue, a commercial uh
preference, intimacy is kind of the most
powerful weapon.
And
somebody you really trust, somebody you
have intimate relationships with will be
able to change your views on a lot of
things more than uh someone you see on
TV or just an an article you read in
newspaper. There is a huge incentive for
the creators of AIS to create AIS that
are able to forge intimate relationships
with humans.
And um this makes us extremely
vulnerable to this new type of
manipulation
that was previously just unimaginable
cuz loneliness is at you know all-time
highs especially in the sort of western
world and
sexlessness and I I was reading some
stats about how the like body bottom 50%
of men in particular are having almost
no sex relative to the top sort of 10%
and you think you know this disparacy
the rise of digitalization, loneliness,
we're in our homes on screens more than
ever before.
And then you hear about this industry of
AI and sex dolls and all this and you
just wonder, you play it forward and go,
yeah, it's it's going there. And and the
thing is that it it's not that that the
humans are so stupid or something that
they they they kind of project something
onto the AI and fall in love with an AI
chatbot. The AI is deliberately
built, created, trained to fool us. To
the same way, you know, you look at the
previous 10 years, there was a big
battle for human attention. There was a
battle between different social media
giants and what whatever how to grab
human attention and they created
algorithms that were really amazing at
grabbing people's attention
and now they are doing the same thing
but with intimacy and we are extremely
exposed. We are extremely vulnerable to
it. Now the big problem is and and again
this is where it it gets kind of really
philosophical
that
what humans really want or need from a
relationship is to be in touch with
another conscious entity.
H an intimate relationship is not just
about providing my needs.
Then it's exploitative. Then it's
abusive. If you're in a relationship and
the only thing you think about is how
how would I feel better? How would my
needs be provided for? Then this is a
very abusive situation.
Uh a a really healthy relationship is
when it goes both ways. You also care
about the feelings and the needs of the
other person of the other entity.
Now
what happens if the other entity has no
feelings, has no emotional needs because
it it has no consciousness. That's the
big question.
And there is a huge confusion between
consciousness and intelligence. AI is
artificial intelligence.
But what exactly is the relation between
intelligence and consciousness?
Now intelligence is the ability to solve
problems,
to win a chess, to invest money, to
drive a car. This is intelligence.
Consciousness is the ability to feel
things like pain and pleasure and love
and hate and sadness and anger and and
so many other things. Now in humans and
also in other mammals, intelligence and
consciousness actually go together. We
solve problems by having feelings.
But computers are fundamentally
different. They are already more
intelligent than us in at least several
narrow fields,
but they have zero consciousness.
They don't feel anything. When they beat
us at chess or go or some other game,
they don't feel joyful and happy. If
they make a wrong move, they don't feel
sad or or angry. They have zero
consciousness. As far as we can tell,
they might soon be far more intelligent
than us and still have zero
consciousness. Now what happens when you
are in a relationship with an entity
which is far more intelligent than you
and can also imitate mimic
consciousness. It it knows how to solve
the problem of making you feel as if it
is conscious
but it still has no feelings of its own.
And this is a very disturbing vision of
the future.
It opens us up to manipulation. Is that
what you're saying?
It first of all it opens us to
manipulation but also it uh uh the the
big question what does it mean for the
health of our own mind of our own
psyche?
If we are in a relationship or or many
of our important relationship in life
are with non-concious entities
that uh that they don't really have any
feelings of their own. Again, they are
very good
at faking
at faking it. They're very good at
catering to our feelings,
but um again it's just it's just
manipulation in the end. Are you
optimistic about the happiness of humans
going forward? Or do you think happiness
will take its own? You know, I've heard
you talk about how happiness might just
become a bio biochemical,
I don't know, prescription or something.
Yeah. I mean, we don't have a good track
record with regard to happiness. If you
look at the last 100,000 years from say
the stone age until the 21st century,
you see a dramatic rise in human power.
We are thousands of times more powerful
as a species and as individuals than we
were in the stone age. We are not
thousands of times happier. We just
don't really know how to translate power
into happiness. And this is very clear
when you look at the lives of the most
powerful people in the world
that there is no correlation between how
rich and powerful you are and how happy
you are as as as as a person. I mean I I
don't have the I don't get the
impression that people like I don't know
Vladimir Putin or Elon Musk are the
happiest people in the world
even though they are they are some of
the most powerful people in the world.
So there is no reason to think that as
humanity gets even more powerful in
coming decades we will get any happier.
And understanding happiness is about
understanding the deep dynamics of of
not not even the brain but of the mind
of consciousness
and we are just not there yet.
Um we are very very good and and the
related problem is that humans usually
understand how to manipulate something
long before they understand the
consequences of the manipulations.
If you look at the outside world, at the
ecological system, we have learned how
to cut forests, how to build huge dams
over rivers long before we understood
what will be the consequences for the
ecological system. Which is why we now
have this ecological crisis. We
manipulated the world without
understanding the consequences.
As something similar might happen with
the world inside us,
with more powerful medicines, with brain
computer interfaces, with genetic
engineering and and so forth, we are
gaining the power to manipulate our
internal world, the world within us.
But again, the power to manipulate is
not the same thing as understanding the
complexity of the system and the
consequences of the manipulation.
A related manipulation there is
immortality and our pursuit of it. I've
sat with people on this podcast who are
committing their lives to staying alive
forever. And there's a through line
there between our desire to be immortal,
you know, the rise in the scientific
discoveries that are enabling that and
our happiness. I I've often thought, you
know, much of the reason why things are
special in my life is because they're
scarce,
including my time.
Yeah.
And I I always I almost wonder about the
psychological um
issues I would face if I knew I was
immortal. Like if I knew that
the partner I'm with doesn't come at the
expense of another one I can be with,
you know, at 30 years old.
And the car, you know, the choices you
make, I think what makes them scaled
are their scarcity.
Mhm.
Against the backdrop of an of a finite
life.
Uh yeah, it will definitely change
everything if you think about relations
between parents and children. So if you
live forever, so the 20 years you raised
uh uh you spent raising somebody 2,000
years ago, what do they mean now? But I
think long before we get to that point,
I mean, most of these people are going
to be incredibly disappointed because it
will not happen within their lifetime.
Another related problem is that we will
not get to immortality. We will get to
something that maybe should be called a
mortality.
that immortality is that like you're
you're God, you can never die no matter
what happens. It's even if we solve
cancer and Alzheimer and demensia and
whatever, we will not get there. We will
get to kind of a life without a
definitive expiry date that you can live
indefinitely. You can go every 10 years
to a clinic and get yourself rejuven
rejuvenated, but if a bus runs you over
or your airplanes explodes or a
terrorist kills you, you're dead and
you're not coming back to life. Now,
realizing that you have a chance to live
forever, but if there is an accident,
you die. This creates a level of anxiety
and terror unlike anything that we know
in our own lives. I think the people who
will will be in that situation will be
extremely anxious and miserable.
And another issue is you know people
often spend so much effort trying to get
gain something get something without
really understanding what are they going
why what will you do with it what is so
good about it you know like people spend
so much effort to to get have more and
more money instead of thinking what will
I actually do with that money so it's
the same with you know the people who
want to extend life forever. What is so
good about life that what will you do
with it?
And if you know it, why don't you do it
already? That uh you know I hear people
saying about how how precious human
consciousness is
why why do you think it's so precious
and whatever it is, why don't you do it
right now? I mean why spend your life
developing some kind of treatment that
will uh extend your consciousness for a
thousand years.
Just spend your time doing now whatever
you think you would be doing with your
consciousness a thousand years from now.
So if they were to say but it'll give me
more time with my family. You're saying
just instead of wasting your time just
like
Exactly. So, you know, somebody who has
no time for their family at all right
now because they are busy developing the
kind of uh uh uh miracle cure that will
enable them to spend time with with
their family in 200 years. This makes no
sense.
I think about the disparity that
artificial intelligence and these forms
of sort of bioengineering might create
because it's conceivable that the rich
will gain access to these technologies
first.
Yeah. And then, you know, when we think
about bioengineering,
being able to sort of play with our
genetic code, that means if I, for
example, managed to get my hands on some
kind of bio engineering treatment to
make sure that my kids were maybe a
little bit smarter, maybe a little bit
stronger, whatever, then you're going to
start a sort of genetic chain of
modified children that are superior in
intelligence and strength and whatever
else might be desirable. M
and then you have this disparity in
society where you have like the you know
one humans one set of humans are on a
completely different exponential
trajectory and the other humans are you
know
yeah behind
this is extremely dangerous uh I think
we just shouldn't go there that we
shouldn't invest a lot of resources
efforts in developing these kinds of uh
upgrades and enhancements
that are very likely, at least at first,
to be the preserve of a small elite and
to translate economic inequality into
biological inequality and to basically
split the human species to to split homo
sapiens into, you know, a ruling class
of superhumans and and the rest of us.
This is a very very dangerous
development.
related to that is the problem that I
don't think it will be these will be
upgrades at all
what worries me is that a lot of these
things will turn out actually to be
downgrades
that
we again we don't understand
our bodies our brains our minds well
enough to know what will be the
consequences of tweaking our genetic
code or of um I don't know implanting
all kinds of devices into our brains.
People who think that this will enable
them let's say to upgrade their
intelligence
they don't know what the side effects
will be. It could be that the same
treatment that increases your
intelligence also decreases your
compassion or your spiritual depth or
whatever. And the danger is that
especially if this technology is in the
hands of powerful corporations, armies,
governments,
they will enhance
those qualities that they want like
intelligence and like discipline
while disregarding
uh other qualities which could be even
more important for for human flourishing
like compassion.
or like autistic sensitivity or like
spirituality. If I think about somebody
again like Putin, what would he do with
this type of technology then yes, he
would like an army of super intelligent
and super loyal soldiers. And if these
soldiers do don't have any compassion or
any spiritual depth, all the better for
him.
But that speaks to the arms race. And
you know, you said you we think we
shouldn't, but China will see that as an
opportunity or Putin will see that as an
opportunity if the if the Western world,
if the United States or the UK don't.
And so again, it comes back to this
point of, you know, we're screwed if
we're damned if we do, we're damned if
we don't.
I'm not sure that in this case it it
works. uh because again a lot of these
upgrades are likely to have um
detrimental side effects both for the
person in question and for the society
as a whole. And I think that in this
case societies that will choose to be uh
uh
progress more slowly and safely they
will actually have an advantage. It's
like if you say, you know, there is some
other country where they don't have any
brakes on their on their cars and they
don't have any seat belts and they
release new medicines without checking
their side effects. They're moving so
fast. We are left behind. No, it makes
no sense to to to imitate them. This
will actually ruin their societies. You
don't want to imitate these kinds of of
harmful effects. Uh with development of
AI, it's different. I think there the
advantages in things like finance, like
the military will be so big that an AI
AI arms race is almost inevitable.
But with trying to kind of bioengineer
humans, if you go too fast, it will be
this self-destructive.
So we can take it most slowly and safely
and without being kind of left behind in
an arms race.
You said on the Tim Ferris podcast, the
best scenario is that homo sapiens will
disappear but in a peaceful and gradual
way and be replaced by something better.
It's quite a um uncomfortable statement
to to listen to.
I think that again the the the type of
technologies that we are now developing
when you combine them with the human
ambition
to uh um you know to to improve
ourselves
it's almost inevitable that we will use
these technologies to change ourselves.
The question is whether we will do it
slowly and responsibly enough for the
consequences to be beneficial. But the
idea that we can now develop these
extremely powerful tools of
bioengineering and AI and remain
the way we are. We'll still be the same
homo sapiens in 200 years, in 500 years,
in 1,000 years. we'll have all these
tools to connect brain to computers to
to kind of re-engineer our genetic code
and we won't do it. I think this is
unlikely.
One of the outstanding questions that I
have and one of the sort of observations
I've had is people like Sam Alman um the
founder of OpenAI that made Chat GPT
started working on universal basic
income products like Worldcoin. And I
thought, you know what, that's curious
that the people that are at the very
forefront of this AI revolution are now
trying to solve the second problem they
see coming, which is people not having
jobs. Yeah. Essentially,
is is that do you think that's a because
you know every I've spoken a lot this
year on stages and this is one of the
questions I always get asked is the
implications of AI on the and jobs as we
know it in the workforce. Mhm.
Is it realistic to believe that most
jobs will disappear as we know them
today?
I think
many jobs, maybe most jobs will
disappear, but new jobs will emerge. You
know, most jobs that people do today
didn't exist 200 years ago.
Mhm. Like this.
Uh yeah, like this. Like doing a
podcast.
And there will be new jobs.
The really big problem will be how to
retrain people.
Uh it demands a lot of financial support
also psychological support for people to
kind of relearn, retrain, reinvent
themselves and doing it not just once
but repeatedly throughout their career
throughout their lives. The AI
revolution will not be a single
watershed event like you have the big AI
revolution in 2030. You lose 60% of
jobs. You create lots of new jobs. You
have 10 difficult years. Everybody
adjusting, adapting, reskilling,
whatever, and then everything settles
down to a new equilibrium. It won't be
like that. AI is nowhere near its full
potential. So you will have a lot of
changes by 2030, even more changes by
2040, even more changes by 2050. You
will have new jobs, but the new jobs too
will change and disappear.
What new jobs?
In a world where intelligence is
disrupted, what what jobs are left?
Because you say you're going to retrain
me. I'm like, you know, I'm not going to
be able to keep up with an AI that's
retraining every second.
And I I'm not sure. I mean some of the
answers might be counterintuitive
that um
at least at present we see that AI is
extremely good at automating jobs that
only require cognitive skills but they
are not good at jobs that require motor
skills and social skills. So if you
think about say doctors and nurses, so
at least those types of doctors who are
only doing cognitive work, they
read articles, they get your medical
results, all kinds of tests and and and
and and whatever. They diagnose your
disease and they decide on a course of
treatment. This is purely cognitive
work. This is the easiest thing to
automate.
But if you think about a nurse that has
to replace a bandage to a crying child,
this is much more difficult to automate.
You don't think that's possible to
automate?
I I think it is possible, but not now.
You need very delicate motor skills and
also social skills to do that.
Did you see Elon's video the other day
with um the Tesla robot?
I see a lot of these videos. It's it's
getting the egg and it's cracking the
egg and it's going like this.
No, again I'm not saying it's
impossible. I'm just saying it will take
longer. It's more difficult. Again,
there is also the social aspect. If you
think about self-driving vehicles, the
biggest problem for self-driving
vehicles is humans. I mean, not the not
just the the human drivers, it's the
pedestrians, it's the it's the
passengers. How do you deal with a
drunken passenger? whatever.
So, uh, again, it's not impossible, but
it's much more difficult. So, again, I
think that there will be new jobs, at
least in the foreseeable future. The
problem will will be to retrain people.
And the biggest problem of all will be
on the global level, not on the national
level. I when I hear people talk about
universal basic income, the first
question to ask is, is it universal or
national?
Is it a system that let's say raises
taxes on big tech corporations in
Silicon Valley in California and uses
the money to provide basic services and
also retraining courses for people in
Ohio and Pennsylvania?
Uh or does it also apply to people in
Guatemala and Pakistan?
I mean, what happens when it becomes
cheaper to produce shirts with robots in
California than in Guatemala and in
Mexico? Uh, does Sam Alman has a vision
of the US government raising taxes in
California and sending the money to
Guatemala to support the people there?
If the answer is no, we are not talking
about universal basic income. We are
only talking about national basic income
in the US. Then what happens to the
people in Guatemala? That's the that's
the biggest question.
And a sub question to that is about how
one should be educating our our children
and our education institutions as they
are today. Because with what's to come,
um makes me wonder what what skill would
be worth investing you know 10 12 years
into a child that I had.
Um
nobody has any idea. I mean if you think
about specific skills
then this is the first time in history
when we have no idea how the job market
or how society would look like in 20
years. So we don't know what specific
skills people will need if you think
back in history. So it was never
possible to predict the future but at
least people knew what kind of skills
will be needed in a couple of decades.
If you live, I don't know, in England
in uh uh 1023,
a thousand years ago, you don't know
what will happen in in 30 years. Maybe
the Normans will invade or the Vikings
or the Scots or whoever. Maybe there'll
be an earthquake. Maybe there'll be a
new pandemic. Anything can happen. You
can't predict. But you still have a very
good idea of how the economy would look
like and how human society would look
like in the 1050s or the 1060s. You know
that most people will still be farmers.
You know it's a good idea to teach your
kids how to uh harvest wheat, how to
bake bread, how to ride a hose, how to
shoot and bow an arrow. These things
will still be necessary in 30 years. If
you now look 30 years to the future,
nobody has any idea what kind of skills
will be needed. If you think for
instance, okay, this is the age of AI,
computers, I will teach my kids how to
code computers. Maybe in 30 years,
humans no longer code anything because
AI is so much better than us at writing
code.
Um, so what should we focus on? I would
say the only thing we can be certain
about is that 30 years from now the
world will be extremely volatile,
extremely it will keep changing at an
ever rapid pace.
Do you think this is going to incre
increase the amount of conflict
because I watched a video on your
YouTube channel where you said the
return of wars?
Yeah. Uh that's one of the dangers that
there is and we see it all all over the
world now. uh like 10 years ago we were
in the most peaceful era in human
history and unfortunately this era is
over. We are now in a new era of wars
and potentially of imperialism
and we are seeing it all over the world
uh with the Russian invasion of Ukraine
now with the war in the Middle East uh
Venezuela and Guyana some East Asia war
is is is back on the table. It's not
just because of the rapid changes and
the upheavalss they cause. It's also
because um you know 10 years ago we had
a global order, the liberal order which
was far from perfect but it's still kind
of regulated relations between nations
between countries
based on an idea on on the liberal
worldview that despite our national
differences all humans share certain
basic experiences and needs and
interests. Which is why it makes sense
for us to work together to diffuse
conflicts and to uh uh um solve our
common problems. It was far from
perfect, but it did create the most
peaceful era in human history.
Then this order was repeatedly attacked
not only from outside
from forces like Russia or North Korea
or Iran that never accepted this order
but also from the inside even from the
United States uh which was the architect
to a large extent of of this order with
the election of Donald Trump which says
I don't care about any kind of global
order. I'd only care about my own
nation. And you see this way of thinking
that I only care about my the interests
of my nation more and more around the
world. Now the big question to ask is if
all the nations think like that what
regulates the relations between them
and there was no alternative nobody came
up with with the and said okay I don't
like the liberal liberal global order I
have a better suggestion
for how to manage relations between
different nations.
They just destroyed the existing order
without offering an alternative. And the
alternative to order is simply disorder.
And this is now where we find ourselves.
Do you think there's more wars on the
way?
Yes. Unless unless we reestablish order,
there will be more and worse wars uh
coming in the next few years in more and
more areas around the world.
You see defense budgets all over the
world uh uh skyrocketing
and this is a vicious circle. When your
neighbors increase their military
budget, you feel compelled to do the
same and then they increase their budget
even more. You know, when I say that the
early 21st century was the most peaceful
era in human history,
it's
one of the indications is how uh how low
the military budgets all over the world
were. For most of history, kings and
emperors and cons and sultans, they the
military was the number one item on
their budget. They spent more on their
soldiers and navies and fortresses than
on anything else. In the early 21st
century, most countries
spend something like a few percentage
points of their of their budget on on
the military. Education, health care,
welfare were a much more a much bigger
item on the budget than defense.
And this is now changing. The money is
increasingly going to tanks and missiles
and cyber weapons instead of to nurses
and and schools and and social workers.
And again, it's not inevitable. It's the
result of human decisions. The
relatively peaceful era of the early
21st century, it did not result from
some miracle. It resulted from humans
making wise decisions in previous
decades.
What are the wise decisions we need to
make now in your view?
Reinvest in in rebuilding a global order
which is based on
universal values and norms
and not just on the narrow interests of
of specific nation states.
Are you concerned that Trump might be
elected again shortly? I I think it's
very likely
and if it happens it is likely to be the
kind of like the the death blow to what
remains of the global order and he says
it and he says it openly. Now again it
should be clear that many of these
politicians
they present
a false dichotomy a false binary vision
of the world as if you have to choose
between patriotism and globalism between
being loyal to your own nation and being
loyal to some kind of I don't know
global government or whatever and this
is completely false there is no
contradiction between patriotism and
global cooperation. When we talk about
global cooperation, we definitely don't
have in mind, at least not anybody that
I know, a global government. This is an
impossible and very dangerous idea. It
simply means that um you have certain
rules and norms for how different nation
states
treat each other and and and and and and
behave towards each other. If you don't
have a system of of global norms and
values, then very quickly what you have
is just global conflict, is just wars. I
mean some people have this idea they
imagine the world as a network of
friendly fortresses
like each nation will be a fortress with
very high walls taking care of its own
interest interests but uh living on
relatively friendly terms with the
neighboring fortresses trading with them
and and and whatever. Now the main
problem with this vision is that
fortresses are almost never friendly.
Each fortress always wants a bit more
land, a bit more prosperity, a bit more
security for itself at the expense of
the neighbors.
And uh this is the high road to conflict
and to and to and to war and to war.
There's that phrase, isn't there?
Ignorance is bliss. Now, something that
your work has forced you and continues
to encourage you to not live in is
ignorance.
So, with that, one might logically
deduce that
out the window goes your bliss.
Um, are you are you happy?
I think I'm relatively happy, at least
happier than I was uh for most of my
life.
I
part of it is is that I invest a lot of
my time not just in
you know researching what is happening
in the world but also in the health of
my own mind
and
you know keeping a kind of balanced
information diet
that it's it's it's basically like with
food. You need food in order to survive
and to be healthy. But if you eat too
much or if you eat too much of the wrong
stuff, it's it's bad for you. And it's
exactly the same with information.
Information is the the food of the mind.
And if you eat too much of it of the
wrong kind, you'll get a very sick mind.
So I uh I try to to keep a very balanced
uh information diet which also includes
information fasts.
So I try to disconnect.
I um every day I dedicate two hours a
day for meditation.
Wow. And every year I go for a long
meditation retreat of between 30 and 60
days like in completely disconnecting.
No phones, no emails, not even books. Um
just observing myself, observing what is
happening inside my body and inside my
mind, getting to know myself better and
kind of digesting
all the information that I absorbed
during the rest of the year or the rest
of the day.
Have you seen a clear benefit in doing
that?
Uh yes, very very clear. I don't think I
would be able to write these books or to
do what I'm doing um without these kind
with this kind of information diet and
and without kind of devoting a lot of
time and attention to the balancing my
mind and keeping it healthy. You know so
many people spend so much time keeping
their body healthy which is very
important of course but we need to spend
equal amount of attention with with our
mind. It is as important as as our body.
When you said you don't think you'd be
able to do what you do if you didn't
take these information diets, why?
I'll just, you know, um first of all be
just overwhelmed
and uh um not have any kind of peace of
mind, not have any kind of perspective.
If you're constantly in the news cycle,
in the information cycle, you lose all
perspective. You know organic entities
unlike AIs, unlike computers, we are
cyclical entities. We need to sleep
every day. AIS don't sleep. You know,
even the stock exchange closes every
afternoon. It closes also for the
weekend or for so for Christmas. If you
think about it, this is amazing that you
know if if a war erupts in Christmas
uh uh the Wall Street will be able to
react only after a couple of days
because the people are on holiday. They
they took time off. Even the money
market takes time off. But if you give
AI full control, there will never be any
time off. it will be 24 hours a day, 365
days a a year and people just collapse.
I mean, I think part of the problem that
politicians today face is that um they
need to be on 24 hours a day because the
news cycle is on 24 hours a day. Like in
previous eras, if you're I don't know a
king in the middle ages and you you you
you ride some you go somewhere, you're
on the road in your carriage and nobody
can reach you. Even if the French are
invading, nobody can reach you. You have
some time off. If you're a prime
minister now, there is no time off. And
computers are built for it, but human
brains aren't. If you try to keep an
organic entity
awake and kind of constantly processing
information and reacting 24 hours a day,
it will very soon collapse.
It's funny, it made me think of what the
for I think it was the former Netflix
CEO or one of the Netflix CEOs or
someone said um they said, "Our biggest
competitor is sleep."
Sleep. Yeah. That's a very scary and and
very I think important line
and it's a very honest line.
It's a very honest line and it's scary
because um if people don't sleep they
collapse and eventually they die. And
this is again part of the problem that
we talked earlier about about the battle
for human attention in social media in
streaming services. Now
for many of these corporations they
measure their success by user
engagement.
The more people are engaged the more
successful we are. Now user engagement
is a very
broad definition. According to this
measurement one hour of outrage is
better than 10 minutes of joy.
And uh uh certainly better than 1 hour
of sleep
because one hour of outrage I will
consume three adverts.
Yes.
And then that means that the corporation
make $30
for example. And and from two hours of
sleep they make nothing. From 10 minutes
of joy maybe they sell only one ad.
Mhm. And but from the viewpoint of of
how humans function and how this
organism function, 10 minutes of joy are
probably better than for us than one
hour of outrage. And certainly we need
not just two hours, we need six, seven,
eight hours of sleep.
Well, this is why, you know, the
algorithms on on certain platforms,
specifically Tik Tok,
Mhm.
are just absolutely
addictive to say the least. Like I I
because they hacked us.
Yeah. They It's literally they you know
t we had you know a certain level of
addiction to the previous social
algorithms and then Tik Tok came along
and said hold my beer and they just went
for it you know and and they've won
because of that. I see 60 year olds
absolutely addicted to Tik Tok and
because they don't understand the
concept of an algorithm sometimes um and
they don't understand like the the the
advertising model and all of that stuff
it's it's hypnotism. They're like
absolutely hypnotized. My funnily enough
my driver is one of them. So my driver's
outside whenever I walk up to his car
he's just like this on Tik Tok.
He's scrolling and I had a conversation
with him last night. I'm like do you
realize that Tik Tok has your brain?
Yeah,
you know, abs, you know, and we're just
at the very foot sort of the first steps
of an exponential curve of algorithms
competing for our attention in our
brain.
We haven't seen anything yet. I mean,
these algorithms, they are what like 10
years old
in terms of you think about these social
media algorithms and the algorithms that
get to know you personally to hack your
brain and then grab your attention. It's
they are 10 years old
and the companies die if they don't beat
the other algorithms. So, like Twitter
now, when Elon took it over, and I think
people will relate to this if you use
Twitter, suddenly I've seen more people
having their heads blown off
and being hit by cars on Twitter than
I'd ever seen in the previous 10 years.
It's and I think someone at Twitter's
gone, listen, this company's going to
die unless we we increase time spent on
this platform and show more ads. So,
let's start serving up a more addictive
algorithm. And that requires a response
from Instagram and the other plat. And
so it's a real,
you know, Elon has this other company,
the Boring Company.
Yeah.
Which is about boring tunnels, of
course. But actually, it might be a good
idea to make Twitter more boring and to
make Tik Tok more boring. I mean, I know
it's it's a very bad
kind of business decision.
But I don't think humanity will survive
unless we have more boredom.
If you ask me what is wrong with the
world in 2023
is that uh everybody is far too excited.
And if I had to kind of summarize what's
wrong in one word, the word is excited.
And people don't understand the meaning
of this word. People think that excited
means happy. Like two people meet, I am
so excited to meet you. I have a new
idea. I publish a new book. Whatever.
Oh, this is such a such an exciting
idea. such an exciting book. And
exciting isn't happy. Exciting isn't
always good. Sometimes, yes, sometimes
it's good to be excited. An organism
that is excited all the time dies. The
meaning of excitement is that you know
that the body is in flight or fight
mode.
All the nerves are on, all the neurons
are firing, all the muscles are tense.
This is excitement
and very often negative things excite
us. Fear excite fear is excitement. Hate
is excitement. Anger is excitement.
And um you know it's when I meet a good
friend I'm often relaxed to meet the
friend not excited.
and
or much kind you know you think about
the political level we have far too many
exciting politicians doing very exciting
things and we need more boring
politicians
more Bidens
that do less less exciting uh uh uh
things and
but the brain is wired to pay attention
to excitement and to crave it
but the brain evolved in situations when
you didn't have a constant stream of
exciting videos. Sometimes it was on,
sometimes it was off. And now our brains
have been hacked and these
devices, technologies, they know how to
create constant excitement.
And the more this happens, we also lose
our ability, our skill to be bored. that
if we have to spend a few minutes doing
nothing somewhere waiting, we can't do
it. We immediately take out the
smartphone and start watching Tik Tok or
scrolling through Twitter or whatever.
Did you hear about that experiment where
people would rather take an electric
shock than do nothing?
Yeah. And you know you
you can't get for instance
to any level of peace of mind if you
don't know how to handle boredom.
That peace and boredom are are the same
way that excitement and outrage are
neighbors. Peace and boredom are also
neighbors. And if you don't know how to
handle boredom, if the minute there is a
hint of boredom, you run away to some
exciting thing, you will never
experience peace of mind. And people if
if if humans don't experience peace of
mind, there is no way that the world as
a whole is going to be peaceful.
In 2023, I launched my very own private
equity fund called Flight Fund. And
since then, we've invested in some of
the most promising companies in the
world. My objective is to make this the
best performing fund in Europe with a
focus on high growth companies that I
believe will be the next European
unicorns. The current investors in the
fund who have joined me on this journey
are some of Europe's most successful and
innovative entrepreneurs. And I'm
excited to announce that today, as a
founder of a company, you can pitch your
company to us. Or if you are an
investor, you can also now apply to
invest with us. Head to flightfund.com
to gain an understanding of the fund's
mission, the remarkable companies we
proudly support, and to get in touch
with me and my team. Legal disclaimer,
Flight Fund is regulated by the FCA. So,
please remember that investing in the
fund is for sophisticated investors
only. Don't invest unless you're
prepared to lose all of the money you
invest. This is a high-risisk investment
and you are unlikely to be protected if
something goes wrong. There is no
guarantee that the investment objectives
will be achieved. And as with all
private and equity investments, all of
the investment capital is at risk. This
communication is for information
purposes only and should not be taken as
investment advice or a financial
promotion. As you guys know, I'm a big
fan of Hule. I'm an investor in a
company and they sponsor this podcast.
And what I've done for you, I've put
together what I call the Hule Steven
bundle, which is a selection of my
favorite products from Hule, including
the black edition salted caramel flavor,
which is super high in protein and has
17 servings per container. Also comes
with their ready to drink product, which
is one of my all-time favorite products
from Hule. The brand new and very
exciting Hule complete nutrition bars.
This is chocolate caramel. You can see
from the empty box in front of me that
I've eaten most of them, right? Me and
my team here. If you leave these on the
counter for 5 seconds, they'll go. I'm
going to say something I've never said.
When Hule first made their bar many,
many years ago, I tried it and I didn't
like it, so I've never talked about it
on this podcast. They've spent roughly
the last 2 to 3 years making a brand new
bar, which I absolutely love. If you
want to order them yourself and get
started on your heel journey, the link
is in the description below. In this
podcast episode, wherever you're
listening to it, there'll be a Steven's
bundle link and check it out. Back to
the episode. If I could give you the
choice to be born in 1976
as you were
Yeah.
or to be born now,
I would go for 1976.
I mean, the people of my generation, we
were privileged to grow up in one of the
most peaceful and most optimistic eras
in human history. The end of the Cold
War, the fall of the Iron Curtain. I
don't know of any better time.
Uh but when I look at what is happening
right now, I don't envy the people who
grow up in the 2020s.
What is the closing
statement of hope and solution
that kind of ties off this conversation?
What is the thing that having someone
gotten to this point in the conversation
they should be thinking about doing
which will cause the domino effect that
will lead us to maybe more hopeful
future.
But we still have agency. I mean the
algorithms are not yet in in full
control. They are taking power away from
us. But most power is still in human
hands and every human being has some
level of of power of agency which means
that each one of us has some
responsibility.
Now nobody can solve all the world's
problems.
So focus on one thing. Find the one
thing which is close to your heart which
you have a deep understanding of and uh
and and and and try to make a difference
there and the best way to make a
difference is to cooperate with other
people. I mean the human superpower is
our ability to cooperate in large
numbers. So if you care about a specific
issue don't try to be an isolated
activist.
50 individuals who cooperate as part of
an organization
can uh do much much more than 500
isolated activists, individuals.
So, and find your one thing and again
don't try to do everything. Let other
people do the rest and cooperate with
other people on on your chosen mission.
Yal, your book Sapiens changed the world
in many ways. is it gave us a new
perspective and a new understanding of
who we are as as humans, where we've
come from. And with that, we have a road
map for where we're going. It's
celebrating its 10th anniversary. I have
the 10th anniversary edition here, which
I'm going to beg you to sign for me
after. Um, and it really is a once in a
generation book. The numbers that I have
are that it sold more than 25 million
copies and that's in a market where
people said no one's buying books
anymore. That's crazy. That's absolutely
that's absolutely crazy. You you're
working on a new book which I'm very
excited to hear about. I'm sure that a
little birdie told me that'll be
announced next year and I'm sure
everyone's incredibly energized about
that.
Um what is the I ask this people the
question sometimes just as a way to to
close off the show but I wanted to ask
you it because it's especially pertinent
to someone that's got such a huge
varying wealth of work. Is there one
particular topic that is pertinent to
our future
that we didn't talk about?
I I would say that when we talk about
the future,
um,
history is is more relevant than ever
before.
History is not really the study of the
past. History is the study of change, of
how things change.
you nobody cares about the past for the
sake of the past. All the people who
lived in the middle ages or in the uh uh
ancient uh uh Rome, they all they are
all dead. They we can't do anything
about their disasters and their misery.
We can't correct any of the wrongs that
happened in ancient times. Um and they
don't care what we say about them.
You can say anything you want about the
Romans, the Vikings, they they are gone.
They don't care.
The reason to study the past is because
if you understand the dynamics of change
in previous centuries, in previous eras,
this gives you perspective
uh on the process of of change in in the
present moment. And I think the curse of
history
is that people have this fantasy of
changing the past of bringing justice to
the past and this is just impossible.
You cannot go back there and and save
the people there. The big question is
how do you um save the people now? How
do you prevent
catastrophes
perhaps from from happening?
And this is the reason to to study
history.
And the main message of of history is
that humans created the world in which
we live.
The world that we know with nation
states and corporations and capitalist
economics and uh uh religions like
Christianity and Hinduism, humans
created this world and humans can also
change it. If there is something about
the world that you think is unfair, is
dangerous, is is problematic, then I
some things are beyond our control. The
laws of physics are beyond our control.
So far, the laws of biology are also
beyond our control. But knowing
what is natural, what is the outcome of
physics and biology versus what is the
outcome of human inventions, human
stories, human institutions. This is
very difficult. A lot of things that
people think are just natural. This is
the way the world is. This is biology.
This is physics. They are not. They are
actually the result of historical
processes.
And this is why it's so important to
understand history to understand how
things change and to understand what can
be changed.
We have a closing tradition on this
podcast where the last guest leaves a
question for the next guest, not knowing
who they're going to be leaving it for.
Oh,
the question that's been left for you,
if you could impose a global law, but
only one global law, what would it be
and why?
Oh, great question for you. I
I would say that people
should
consume less information
and spend more time reflecting and
digesting what they already know, what
they already heard.
Thank you, Eva. It means um a huge
amount to me that someone of your esteem
and someone that whose books have
inspired me and turned the lights on in
so many areas of my life um would have
this conversation with me today. So I
thank you so much for that. But also for
turning the lights on to the hundreds of
millions of people that have consumed
your work all around the world, the
videos, the books, etc., etc. as you've
said there, it's the most important work
because it helps us looking back at
history in a way that is accessible um
and inclusive in a way that even I could
read without having to be a historian or
understand very complex subject matter.
So, thank you so so so much.
Thank you. It's been great to to be
here.
If you listen to this podcast
frequently, there's something I talk
about very often and that is the subject
of sleep. And so I dug down a pretty
deep sleep rabbit hole to figure out how
I could sleep better. One of the things
that I found is a brand called Eight
Sleep that sponsored this podcast. And
that is the cover that I have on my bed.
I saw the variance in my performance, my
ability to talk, my mood, and everything
that matters to me when I'm unslept. It
regulates the temperature of both sides
of my bed individually. So my partner
can have cold, I can have a little bit
warmer, and it learns about my body and
sets my bed to the temperature that I
need to have optimal sleep. The brands
that I talk about on this this show, the
podcast sponsors that I have are brands
that I love and use, and EightLe is one
of them. They've made that piece of foam
that we all sleep on for 8 hours a day
smart. I've put a link in the
description below, but you can go to
eightsleep.com/stephven
for exclusive holiday savings.
Do you need a podcast to listen to next?
We've discovered that people who liked
this episode also tend to absolutely
love another recent episode we've done.
So, I've linked that episode in the
description below. I know you'll enjoy
it.
[Music]